---
created_at: 2013-03-01
kind: article
title: "Big-O"
---

As a self-taught programmer, I've happened upon less formal education in the
art of data structures and algorithms than those who attended university. Most
of what I've learned came through long nights spent on Wikipedia, all of it
directed towards solving problems I was experiencing in a company or project I
was working on. But sometimes this just-in-time learning approach doesn't work
so well. Outside of reading a large textbook, or taking a course on
[Coursera][], it can be hard to discover new knowledge if you aren't in an
academic environment. So that's why I started the [London Big-O
Meetup](http://www.meetup.com/big-o-london/).

  [coursera]: http://www.coursera.org/

The aim is simple: to provide a forum where working and studying programmers in
the city can share their favorite data structures and algorithms in a
language-agnostic setting, and thus raise the knowledge level of the entire
group in a way that wouldn't be possible otherwise. We want to hear real
stories of how people apply 'academic' DS&A theory in their daily professional
lives, or cutting-edge research that could provide faster or more accurate ways
of doing difficult things with computers. Anything that can be run on a
computer is up for discussion. The only requirement is that it be accessible to
an audience of people who code on a daily basis.

The first meetup ran in December 2012, and went pretty well. I gave an intro to
the goals of the group, and a run-through of [Diffie-Hellman Key Exchange][].
[Tiberiu](http://underrated.org/) spoke about discrete event simulation for
deterministic hardware verification (including how to simulate parallelism),
and we also had a spur-of-the-moment speaker jump in to add some thoughts on
the [frame problem][].

  [diffie-hellman key exchange]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Diffie%E2%80%93Hellman_key_exchange
  [frame problem]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Frame_problem

I'm organizing the second meetup for Thursday the 7th of March, so we can get
it done before I fly off to [PyCon](https://us.pycon.org/2013/) on the 11th.
I've already reached out to speakers and an event space, and I'm waiting on
confirmation, but if you're in London and want to broaden the horizons of your
mind, you should [come along](http://www.meetup.com/big-o-london/events/106036312/).
