--- 
kind: article
created_at: 2009-11-02
title: "BioSeq"
---

A key problem in the field of Bioinformatics is referring to biological
sequences. A single sequence may be known by many names across many databases on
the web, with distinct ‘IDs’ on different sites and little to tie them together.

This is where BioSeq comes in. BioSeq is a technology I’m currently working on
to leverage Content-Addressable Storage (CAS), powered by
[Bitcache](http://bitcache.org/), to store and refer to biological sequence
data. Sequences are identified with a URI like the following:

    bioseq:a21268b77c91c67973efa8289cc42a62772d8c33

The scheme-specific part of a `bioseq:` URI is that sequence’s unique
identifier, generated by applying a cryptographic hash algorithm (currently
SHA1) to the sequence. The sequence itself can then be retrieved by querying a
Bitcache server for the hash, usually via a simple HTTP GET to
`http://bitcache.example.com/-identifier-`.

The use of cryptographic hashes as identifiers causes the URI to have several
useful properties:

*   A cryptographic hash algorithm will always produce a fixed-length output
    regardless of the size of the input, so URIs have a fixed-length.

*   The hashes of two identical sequences will always be identical, and the
    hashes of two different sequences have such a small probability of collision
    that we may safely ignore this risk. This means `bioseq:` URIs are truly
    universal, since a given URI will always refer unambiguously to one
    biological sequence.

*   This also gives the property that `bioseq:` URIs are independent of the
    server on which the sequences themselves are stored; it is up to the client
    which wants to fetch the sequence to resolve the URI into a URL. This can
    actually be done with URI prefixes: setting `bioseq:` as a prefix pointing
    to a Bitcache server (in an RDF document, for example) will make URI-to-URL
    resolution occur automatically.

*   Since two identical sequences will have the same address, redundancy (on the
    sequence level) is eradicated entirely.

*   Because changing a sequence will cause its hash to change, the
    fetching/updating of sequences will also verify data integrity.

*   CAS makes incremental server-to-server replication very easy, since the
    dataset is append-only. See Chris Anderson’s
    [blog post](http://jchrisa.net/drl/_design/sofa/_show/post/CouchDB-Implements-a-Fundamental-Algorithm)
    on CouchDB replication to see how replication could be implemented on top of
    Bitcache.

The whole concept is still in the planning stages, but the technology to realize
it is all present. In a following blog post, I’ll describe how BioSeq will
integrate with other semantic web technologies, allowing for the creation of a
scalable, distributed infrastructure for storing and querying biological
sequence data.
